# useCallback: custom hooks

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

## Background

### Memoization in general

Memoization: a performance optimization technique which eliminates the need to
recompute a value for a given input by storing the original computation and
returning that stored value when the same input is provided. Caching is a form
of memoization. Here's a simple implementation of memoization:

```ts
const values = {}
function addOne(num: number) {
  if (values[num] === undefined) {
    values[num] = num + 1 // <-- here's the computation
  }
  return values[num]
}
```

One other aspect of memoization is value referrential equality. For example:

```ts
const dog1 = new Dog('sam')
const dog2 = new Dog('sam')
console.log(dog1 === dog2) // false
```

Even though those two dogs have the same name, they are not the same. However,
we can use memoization to get the same dog:

```ts
const dogs = {}
function getDog(name: string) {
  if (dogs[name] === undefined) {
    dogs[name] = new Dog(name)
  }
  return dogs[name]
}

const dog1 = getDog('sam')
const dog2 = getDog('sam')
console.log(dog1 === dog2) // true
```

You might have noticed that our memoization examples look very similar.
Memoization is something you can implement as a generic abstraction:

```ts
function memoize<ArgType, ReturnValue>(cb: (arg: ArgType) => ReturnValue) {
  const cache: Record<ArgType, ReturnValue> = {}
  return function memoized(arg: ArgType) {
    if (cache[arg] === undefined) {
      cache[arg] = cb(arg)
    }
    return cache[arg]
  }
}

const addOne = memoize((num: number) => num + 1)
const getDog = memoize((name: string) => new Dog(name))
```

Our abstraction only supports one argument, if you want to make it work for any
type/number of arguments, knock yourself out.

### Memoization in React

Luckily, in React we don't have to implement a memoization abstraction. They
made two for us! `useMemo` and `useCallback`. For more on this read:
[Memoization and React](https://epicreact.dev/memoization-and-react).

You know the dependency list of `useEffect`? Here's a quick refresher:

```tsx
React.useEffect(() => {
  window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
}, [count]) // <-- that's the dependency list
```

Remember that the dependency list is how React knows whether to call your
callback (and if you don't provide one then React will call your callback every
render). It does this to ensure that the side effect you're performing in the
callback doesn't get out of sync with the state of the application.

But what happens if I use a function in my callback?

```tsx
const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, []) // <-- what goes in that dependency list?
```

We could just put the `count` in the dependency list and that would
actually/accidentally work, but what would happen if one day someone were to
change `updateLocalStorage`?

```diff
- const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
+ const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem(key, count)
```

Would we remember to update the dependency list to include the `key`? Hopefully
we would. But this can be a pain to keep track of dependencies. Especially if
the function that we're using in our `useEffect` callback is coming to us from
props (in the case of a custom component) or arguments (in the case of a custom
hook).

Instead, it would be much easier if we could just put the function itself in the
dependency list:

```javascript
const updateLocalStorage = () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, [updateLocalStorage]) // <-- function as a dependency
```

The problem with that though it will trigger the `useEffect` to run every
render. This is because `updateLocalStorage` is defined inside the component
function body. So it's re-initialized every render. Which means it's brand new
every render. Which means it changes every render. Which means... you guessed
it, our `useEffect` callback will be called every render!

**This is the problem `useCallback` solves**. And here's how you solve it

```tsx
const updateLocalStorage = React.useCallback(
  () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count], // <-- yup! That's a dependency list!
)
React.useEffect(() => {
  updateLocalStorage()
}, [updateLocalStorage])
```

What that does is we pass React a function and React gives that same function
back to us... Sounds kinda useless right? Imagine:

```tsx
// this is not how React actually implements this function. We're just imaginging!
function useCallback(callback: Function) {
  return callback
}
```

Uhhh... But there's a catch! On subsequent renders, if the elements in the
dependency list are unchanged, instead of giving the same function back that we
give to it, React will give us the same function it gave us last time. So
imagine:

```tsx
// this is not how React actually implements this function. We're just imaginging!
let lastCallback
function useCallback(callback: Function, deps: Array<unknown>) {
  if (depsChanged(deps)) {
    lastCallback = callback
    return callback
  } else {
    return lastCallback
  }
}
```

So while we still create a new function every render (to pass to `useCallback`),
React only gives us the new one if the dependency list changes.

In this exercise, we're going to be using `useCallback`, but `useCallback` is
just a shortcut to using `useMemo` for functions:

```ts
// the useMemo version:
const updateLocalStorage = React.useMemo(
  // useCallback saves us from this annoying double-arrow function thing:
  () => () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count],
)

// the useCallback version
const updateLocalStorage = React.useCallback(
  () => window.localStorage.setItem('count', count),
  [count],
)
```

🦉 A common question with this is: "Why don't we just wrap every function in
`useCallback`?" You can read about this in my blog post
[When to useMemo and useCallback](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/usememo-and-usecallback).

🦉 And if the concept of a "closure" is new or confusing to you, then
[give this a read](https://mdn.io/closure). (Closures are one of the reasons
it's important to keep dependency lists correct.)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/02.tsx)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.tsx)

**People tend to find this exercise more difficult,** so I strongly advise
spending some time understanding how the code works before making any changes!

Also, one thing to keep in mind is that React hooks are a great foundation upon
which to build libraries and many have been built. For that reason, you don't
often need to go this deep into making custom hooks. So if you find this one
isn't clicking for you, know that you _are_ learning and when you _do_ face a
situation when you need to use this knowledge, you'll be able to come back and
it will click right into place.

👨‍💼 Peter the Product Manager told us that we've got more features coming our way
that will require managing async state. We've already got some code for our
pokemon lookup feature (if you've gone through the "React Hooks" workshop
already, then this should be familiar, if not, spend some time playing with the
app to get up to speed with what we're dealing with here). We're going to
refactor out the async logic so we can reuse this in other areas of the app.

**So, your job is** to extract the logic from the `PokemonInfo` component into a
custom and generic `useAsync` hook. In the process you'll find you need to do
some fancy things with dependencies (dependency arrays are the biggest challenge
to deal with when making custom hooks).

NOTE: In this part of the exercise, we don't need `useCallback`. We'll add it in
the extra credits. It's important that you work on this first refactor first so
you can appreciate the value `useCallback` provides in certain circumstances.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 use useCallback to empower the user to customize memoization

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-1.tsx)

Unfortunately, the ESLint plugin is unable to determine whether the
`dependencies` argument is a valid argument for `useEffect` which is a shame,
and normally I'd say just ignore it and move on. But, there's another solution
to this problem which I think is probably better.

Instead of accepting `dependencies` to `useAsync`, why don't we just treat the
`asyncCallback` as a dependency? Any time `asyncCallback` changes, we know that
we should call it again. The problem is that because our `asyncCallback` depends
on the `pokemonName` which comes from props, it has to be defined within the
body of the component, which means that it will be defined on every render which
means it will be new every render. This is where `React.useCallback` comes in!

Here's another example of the `React.useCallback` API:

```tsx
function ConsoleGreeting(props) {
  const greet = React.useCallback(
    greeting => console.log(`${greeting} ${props.name}`),
    [props.name],
  )

  React.useEffect(() => {
    const helloGreeting = 'Hello'
    greet(helloGreeting)
  }, [greet])
  return <div>check the console</div>
}
```

The first argument to `useCallback` is the callback you want called, the second
argument is an array of dependencies which is similar to `useEffect`. When one
of the dependencies changes between renders, the callback you passed in the
first argument will be the one returned from `useCallback`. If they do not
change, then you'll get the callback which was returned the previous time (so
the callback remains the same between renders).

So we only want our `asyncCallback` to change when the `pokemonName` changes.
See if you can make things work like this:

```tsx
// 🐨 you'll need to wrap asyncCallback in React.useCallback
function asyncCallback() {
  if (!pokemonName) {
    return
  }
  return fetchPokemon(pokemonName)
}

// 🐨 you'll need to update useAsync to remove the dependencies and list the
// async callback as a dependency.
const state = useAsync(asyncCallback)
```

### 2. 💯 return a memoized `run` function from useAsync

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-2.tsx)

Requiring users to provide a memoized value is fine. You can document it as part
of the API and expect people to just read the docs right? lol, that's hilarious
😂 It'd be WAY better if we could redesign the API a bit so we (as the hook
developers) are the ones who have to memoize the function, and the users of our
hook don't have to worry about it.

So see if you can redesign this a little bit by providing a (memoized) `run`
function that people can call in their own `useEffect` like this:

```tsx
// 💰 destructuring this here now because it just felt weird to call this
// "state" still when it's also returning a function called "run" 🙃
const {data: pokemon, status, error, run} = useAsync()

React.useEffect(() => {
  if (!pokemonName) {
    return
  }
  // 💰 note the absense of `await` here. We're literally passing the promise
  // to `run` so `useAsync` can attach it's own `.then` handler on it to keep
  // track of the state of the promise.
  const pokemonPromise = fetchPokemon(pokemonName)
  run(pokemonPromise)
}, [pokemonName, run])
```

### 3. 💯 avoid race conditions

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-3.tsx)

When dealing with anything asynchronous, you can sometimes run into what are
called "race conditions." A race condition is a situation where two or more
related asynchronous tasks complete in an unexpected order leading to an
undesired result.

We have a race condition in our code, but you can't tell because our API is
mocked. If you want to experience it, then update this line:

```diff
- run(fetchPokemon(pokemonName))
+ run(fetchPokemon(pokemonName, {delay: Math.random() * 5000}))
```

What this will do is make it so the mocked backend will take anywhere from 0ms
to 5000ms to complete our request. Now, click two pokemon in rapid succession.
Do it again, and again. Eventually you'll observe the problem. Sometimes the one
you picked first, shows up last!

The correct thing to do here is always focus on the pokemon that was selected
last. To do this, we'll keep track of the latest promise in our state object and
only update the state if the dispatch is coming from the latest promise.

💰 This one is a bit tricky, so I'm going to give you the type updates for our
reducer's `State` and `Action` types:

```tsx
type AsyncState<DataType> =
  | {
      status: 'idle'
      data?: null
      error?: null
      promise?: null
    }
  | {
      status: 'pending'
      data?: null
      error?: null
      promise: Promise<DataType>
    }
  | {
      status: 'resolved'
      data: DataType
      error: null
      promise: null
    }
  | {
      status: 'rejected'
      data: null
      error: Error
      promise: null
    }

type AsyncAction<DataType> =
  | {type: 'reset'}
  | {type: 'pending'; promise: Promise<DataType>}
  | {type: 'resolved'; data: DataType; promise: Promise<DataType>}
  | {type: 'rejected'; error: Error; promise: Promise<DataType>}
```

That should be enough to get you going!

### 4. 💯 abort unused requests

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/02.extra-4.tsx)

If you open the network tab as you're switching pokemon, you'll notice that even
though we're ignoring the pokemon that's not the latest choice, the browser is
still downloading and parsing that data as `JSON`. This is not a big deal for
our small app, but it could be a problem for other situations you may face.

Luckily for us, there's a way to tell the browser to cancel fetch requests:
[`AbortController`s](https://mdn.io/abortcontroller)! Here's a simple example of
using an abort controller with `fetch`:

```tsx
// create the abort controller:
const abortController = new AbortController()

// send off the request:
const promise = fetch('some-api', {signal: abortController.signal})

// oh no! Nevermind! We don't want to waste resources on that request anymore:
abortController.abort()

// 💥 NOTE: the promise is rejected because it's impossible to "cancel" a promise
// luckily for us, we won't have to worry about this thanks to the way we've
// coded our reducer, but you may need to handle the rejected promise in other
// situations.
```

It's important to know that once the request is sent we can't tell the server to
stop processing stuff. That request is gone and there's nothing we can do about
it. All the abort controller does is tell the browser to "ignore" the response.

Our `fetchPokemon` utility has support for `signal` built-in already:

```tsx
fetchPokemon(pokemonName, {signal: abortController.signal})
```

So all you need to do is create the abort controller and then abort it in the
event the user changes their mind and the `pokemonName` changes. 💰 This is the
perfect situation for the `useEffect` cleanup function.

💰 Try not to overthink this one. There are only a couple of line changes
necessary compared to the previous extra credit and they're all in the
`useEffect`.

## 🦉 Other notes

### `useEffect` and `useCallback`

The use case for `useCallback` in the exercise is a perfect example of the types
of problems `useCallback` is intended to solve. However the examples in these
instructions are intentionally contrived. You can simplify things a great deal
by _not_ extracting code from `useEffect` into functions that you then have to
memoize with `useCallback`. Read more about this here:
[Myths about useEffect](https://epicreact.dev/myths-about-useeffect).

### `useCallback` use cases

The entire purpose of `useCallback` is to memoize a callback for use in
dependency lists and props on memoized components (via `React.memo`, which you
can learn more about from the performance workshop). The _only_ time it's useful
to use `useCallback` is when the function you're memoizing is used in one of
those two situations.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=02%3A%20useCallback%3A%20custom%20hooks&em=).
