# useContext: simple Counter

## 📝 Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/03.md`

## Background

Sharing state between components is a common problem. The best solution for this
is to 📜 [lift your state](https://reactjs.org/docs/lifting-state-up.html). This
requires 📜 [prop drilling](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) which is
not a problem, but there are some times where prop drilling can cause a real
pain.

To avoid this pain, we can insert some state into a section of our react tree,
and then extract that state anywhere within that react tree without having to
explicitly pass it everywhere. This feature is called `context`. In some ways
it's like global variables, but it doesn't suffer from the same problems (and
maintainability nightmares) of global variables thanks to how the API works to
make the relationships explicit.

Here's how you use context:

```javascript
import * as React from 'react'

const FooContext = React.createContext()

function FooDisplay() {
  const foo = React.useContext(FooContext)
  return <div>Foo is: {foo}</div>
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <FooContext.Provider value="I am foo">
    <FooDisplay />
  </FooContext.Provider>,
  document.getElementById('root'),
)
// renders <div>Foo is: I am foo</div>
```

`<FooDisplay />` could appear anywhere in the render tree, and it will have
access to the `value` which is passed by the `FooContext.Provider` component.

Note that as a first argument to `createContext`, you can provide a default
value which React will use in the event someone calls `useContext` with your
context, when no value has been provided:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

Most of the time, I don't recommend using a default value because it's probably
a mistake to try and use context outside a provider, so in our exercise I'll
show you how to avoid that from happening.

🦉 Keep in mind that while context makes sharing state easy, it's not the only
solution to Prop Drilling pains and it's not necessarily the best solution
either. React's composition model is powerful and can be used to avoid issues
with prop drilling as well. Learn more about this from
[Michael Jackson on Twitter](https://twitter.com/mjackson/status/1195495535483817984)

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/03.tsx)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.tsx)

We're putting everything in one file to keep things simple, but I've labeled
things a bit so you know that typically your context provider will be placed in
a different file and expose the provider component itself as well as the custom
hook to access the context value.

We're going to take the Count component that we had before and separate the
button from the count display. We need to access both the `count` state as well
as the `setCount` updater in these different components which live in different
parts of the tree. Normally lifting state up would be the way to solve this
trivial problem, but this is a contrived example so you can focus on learning
how to use context.

Your job is to fill in the `CountProvider` function component so that the app
works and the tests pass.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 create a consumer hook

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-1.tsx)

Imagine what would happen if someone tried to consume your context value without
using your context provider. For example, as mentioned above when discussing the
default value:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

If you don't provide a default context value, that would render
`<div>Foo is: </div>`. This is because the context value would be `undefined`.
In real-world scenarios, having an unexpected `undefined` value can result in
errors that can be difficult to debug.

In this extra credit, you need to create a custom hook that I can use like this:

```javascript
// inside CountDisplay/Counter for example
const [count, setCount] = useCount()
```

And if you change the `App` to this:

```javascript
function App() {
  return (
    <div>
      <CountDisplay />
      <Counter />
    </div>
  )
}
```

It should throw an error indicating that `useCount` must be used within a
CountProvider.

### 2. 💯 caching in a context provider

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-2.tsx)

Let's try the last exercise over again with a bit more of a complex/practical
example. That's right! We're back to the Pokemon info app! This time it has
caching in place which is cool. So if you enter the same pokemon information,
it's cached so it loads instantaneously.

However, we have a requirement that we want to list all the cached pokemon in
another part of the app, so we're going to use context to store the cache. This
way both parts of the app which need access to the pokemon cache will have
access.

Because this is hard to describe in words (and because it's a completely
separate example), there's a starting point for you in
`./src/exercise/03.extra-2.js`.

### 3. 💯 Remove context

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/03.extra-3.tsx)

NOTE: This extra credit builds on top of what you just did in
`./src/exercise/03.extra-2.js`, so work on this one in there.

Sometimes you really just don't need context, especially when passing props a
few levels isn't a big deal. So in this extra credit, you're going to remove
context and pass props instead. You'll delete the `createContext`,
`usePokemonCache`, and `PokemonCacheProvider` stuff and do the
`const [cache, dispatch] = React.useReducer(pokemonCacheReducer, {})` directly
inside the `PokemonSection` component.

This is just to illustrate that sometimes you don't need context. The biggest
use case for context is for libraries that need to implicitly share state
between components and you can learn more about this in the Advanced React
Patterns workshop.

## 🦉 Other notes

`Context` also has the unique ability to be scoped to a specific section of the
React component tree. A common mistake of context (and generally any
"application" state) is to make it globally available anywhere in your
application when it's actually only needed to be available in a part of the app
(like a single page). Keeping a context value scoped to the area that needs it
most has improved performance and maintainability characteristics.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=03%3A%20useContext%3A%20simple%20Counter&em=).
