# useDebugValue: useMedia

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/06.md`

## Background

[The React DevTools browser extension](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/react-developer-tools/fmkadmapgofadopljbjfkapdkoienihi?hl=en)
is a must-have for any React developer. When you start writing custom hooks, it
can be useful to give them a special label. This is especially useful to
differentiate different usages of the same hook in a given component.

This is where `useDebugValue` comes in. You use it in a custom hook, and you
call it like so:

```javascript
function useCount({initialCount = 0, step = 1} = {}) {
  React.useDebugValue({initialCount, step})
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return [count, increment]
}
```

So now when people use the `useCount` hook, they'll see the `initialCount` and
`step` values for that particular hook.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/exercise/06.js)
- [Final](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/06.js)

In this exercise, we have a custom `useMedia` hook which uses
`window.matchMedia` to determine whether the user-agent satisfies a given media
query. In our `Box` component, we're using it three times to determine whether
the screen is big, medium, or small and we change the color of the box based on
that.

Now, take a look at the png files associated with this exercise. You'll notice
that the before doesn't give any useful information for you to know which hook
record references which hook. In the after version, you'll see a really nice
label associated with each hook which makes it obvious which is which.

If you don't have the browser extension installed, install it now and open the
React tab in the DevTools. Select the `<Box />` component in the React tree.
Your job is to use `useDebugValue` to provide a nice label.

> Note: your hooks may look a tiny bit different from the screenshots thanks to
> the fact that we're using
> [`stop-runaway-react-effects`](https://github.com/kentcdodds/stop-runaway-react-effects).
> Just focus on the label. That should be the same.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ use the format function

[Production deploy](https://advanced-react-hooks.netlify.com/isolated/final/06.extra-1.js)

`useDebugValue` also takes a second argument which is an optional formatter
function, allowing you to do stuff like this if you like:

```javascript
const formatCountDebugValue = ({initialCount, step}) =>
  `init: ${initialCount}; step: ${step}`

function useCount({initialCount = 0, step = 1} = {}) {
  React.useDebugValue({initialCount, step}, formatCountDebugValue)
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return [count, increment]
}
```

This is only really useful for situations where computing the debug value is
computationally expensive (and therefore you only want it calculated when the
DevTools are open and not when your users are using the app). In our case this
is not necessary, however, go ahead and give it a try anyway.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%94%A5&e=06%3A%20useDebugValue%3A%20useMedia&em=).
