# useContext: simple Counter

## Background

Sharing state between components is a common problem. The best solution for this
is to 📜 [lift your state](https://reactjs.org/docs/lifting-state-up.html). This
requires 📜 [prop drilling](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/prop-drilling) which is
not a problem, but there are some times where prop drilling can cause a real
pain.

To avoid this pain, we can insert some state into a section of our react tree,
and then extract that state anywhere within that react tree without having to
explicitly pass it everywhere. This feature is called `context`. In some ways
it's like global variables, but it doesn't suffer from the same problems (and
maintainability nightmares) of global variables thanks to how the API works to
make the relationships explicit.

Here's how you use context:

```javascript
import React from 'react'

const FooContext = React.createContext()

function FooDisplay() {
  const foo = React.useContext(FooContext)
  return <div>Foo is: {foo}</div>
}

ReactDOM.render(
  <FooContext.Provider value="I am foo">
    <FooDisplay />
  </FooContext.Provider>,
  document.getElementById('root'),
)
// renders <div>Foo is: I am foo</div>
```

`<FooDisplay />` could appear anywhere in the render tree, and it will have
access to the `value` which is passed by the `FooContext.Provider` component.

Note that as a first argument to `createContext`, you can provide a default
value which React will use in the event someone calls `useContext` with your
context, when no value has been provided:

```javascript
ReactDOM.render(<FooDisplay />, document.getElementById('root'))
```

Most of the time, I don't recommend using a default value because it's probably
a mistake to try and use context outside a provider, so in our exercise I'll
show you how to avoid that from happening.

## Exercise

We're putting everything in one file to keep things simple, but I've labeled
things a bit so you know that typically your context provider will be placed in
a different file and expose the provider component itself as well as the custom
hook to access the context value.

We're going to take the Count component that we had before and separate the
button from the count display. We need to access both the `count` state as well
as the `setCount` updater in these different components which live in different
parts of the tree. Normally lifting state up would be the way to solve this
trivial problem, but this is a contrived example so you can focus on learning
how to use context.

Your job is to fill in the `CountProvider` function component and `useCount`
custom hook so that the app works and the tests pass.

## 🦉 Other notes

`Context` also has the unique ability to be scoped to a specific section of the
React component tree. A common mistake of context (and generally any
"application" state) is to make it globally available anywhere in your
application when it's actually only needed to be available in a part of the app
(like a single page). Keeping a context value scoped to the area that needs it
most has improved performance and maintainability characteristics.

## 🦉 Elaboration & Feedback

After the instruction, copy the URL below into your browser:
http://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks&e=useContext%3A%20simple%20Counter&em=
