# useDebugValue: useMedia

## Background

[The React DevTools browser extension](https://github.com/facebook/react-devtools)
is a must have for any React developer. When you start writing custom hooks, it
can be useful to give them a special label. This is especially useful to
differentiate different usages of the same hook in a given component.

This is where `useDebugValue` comes in. You use it in a custom hook, and you
call it like so:

```javascript
function useCount({initialCount = 0, step = 1} = {}) {
  React.useDebugValue({initialCount, step})
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return [count, increment]
}
```

So now when people use the `useCount` hook, they'll see the `initialCount` and
`step` values for that particular hook.

## Exercise

In this exercise, we have a custom `useMedia` hook which uses
`window.matchMedia` to determine whether the user-agent satisfies a given media
query. In our `Box` component, we're using it three times to determine whether
the screen is big, medium, or small and we change the color of the box based on
that.

Now, take a look at the png files associated with this exercise. You'll notice
that the before doesn't give any useful information for you to know which hook
record references which hook. In the after version, you'll see a really nice
label associated with each hook which makes it obvious which is which.

If you don't have the browser extension installed, install it now and open the
React tab in the DevTools. Select the `<Box />` component in the React tree.
Your job is to use `useDebugValue` to provide a nice label.

> Note: your hooks may look a tiny bit different from the screenshots thanks to
> our hacks.js file in this project. Just focus on the label. That should be the
> same.

## 🦉 Other Notes

### New DevTools

If you want to try out the new React DevTools, you can install them here:

https://react-devtools-experimental.now.sh/

I wouldn't recommend running both at the same time.

### Formatter argument

`useDebugValue` also takes a second argument which is an optional formatter
function, allowing you to do stuff like this if you like:

```javascript
const formatCountDebugValue = ({initialCount, step}) =>
  `init: ${initialCount}; step: ${step}`

function useCount({initialCount = 0, step = 1} = {}) {
  React.useDebugValue({initialCount, step}, formatCountDebugValue)
  const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(c => c + 1)
  return [count, increment]
}
```

## 🦉 Elaboration & Feedback

After the instruction, copy the URL below into your browser:
http://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Advanced%20React%20Hooks&e=useDebugValue%3A%20useMedia&em=
